>> Sreenivasan: FOR THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, AUGUST 10...
NEW AMERICAN EFFORTS TO SAVE
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF IRAQIS WHO
FLED FROM ISLAMIC JIHADISTS.
THE BURDEN OF COLLEGE DEBT.
SURPRISING NEW STATISTICS ABOUT
HOW MUCH IT WEIGHS ON GRADUATES,
AND FOR HOW LONG.
AND FROM BOSTON, THE ARTIST
JAMIE WYETH.
PICKING UP WHERE HIS FATHER AND
GRANDFATHER LEFT OFF.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN IRAQ TODAY, A RARE
BATTLEFIELD DEFEAT FOR ISLAMIC
MILITANTS WHO HAVE CAPTURED
LARGE PORTIONS OF THE NORTH AND
WEST OF THE COUNTRY WITH LITTLE
RESISTANCE THE PAST FEW MONTHS.
KURDISH FIGHTERS REPORTEDLY
FORCED THE JIHADISTS TO RETREAT
FROM TWO TOWNS THEY HAD CAPTURED
ABOUT 30 MILES FROM ERBIL.
MANY AMERICANS ARE IN ERBIL.
RESPONDING TO THE GROWING CRISIS
IN NORTHERN IRAQ, THE STATE
DEPARTMENT TODAY REMOVED SOME
PERSONNEL FROM THE U.S.
CONSULATE IN ERBIL.
THE U.S. HAD MOVED SOME
PERSONNEL FROM BAGHDAD TO ERBIL
JUST TWO MONTHS AGO, BECAUSE OF
THE DETERIORATING SECURITY
SITUATION NEAR THE CAPITAL.
EARLIER TODAY, U.S. WARPLANES
AGAIN DROPPED BOMBS ON MILITANT
POSITIONS AND LATE LAST NIGHT
AMERICAN AND BRITISH PLANES
DELIVERED MORE AID TO YAZIDIS, A
MINORITY RELIGIOUS GROUP WHO HAD
FLED THE AREA IN THE FACE OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE ADVANCE.
THE YAZIDIS TOOK REFUGE ON A
MOUNTAIN, WHERE THOUSANDS OF
THEM ARE STILL STRANDED WITH
LITTLE FOOD OR WATER.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM JONATHAN
RUGMAN OF ITN.
>> OTHER BUILDING SITES EAST OF
SINJAR, THERE IS WHAT 20
FAMILIES CALL HOME.
>> THEY ARE CAMPING UNDER THE
CONCRETE, AFTER ESCAPING THE
JIHADIST ADVANCE WITH THE
CLOTHES ON THEIR BACKS AND
NOTHING MORE.
SWINGING FROM BUILDING WOOD IS
BABY UNI, JUST SIX MONTHS OLD.
HIS MOTHER TOLD ME ISLAMIC
STATE FIGHTERS HAVE CAPTURED HER
HUSBAND IN SINJAR AND THAT SHE
AND HER FOUR CHILDREN COULD
NEVER GO BACK THERE.
>> HAS SIMILAR SAYS THE
JIHADISTS HAVE TAKEN HIS SON.
>> HE WILL EITHER BE CONVERTED
TO ISLAM OR KILLED, HE SAYS.
WE CAN'T LIVE WITH THE ARABS
ANYMORE.
>> AND THIS IS HALI.
>> EXHAUSTED AFTER HER NINE HOUR
TREK DOWN FROM SINJAR MOUNTAIN.
>> ALL HER RELATIVES ARE MISSING
AND PRESUMED DEAD.
>> FROM HIS MOBILE PHONE, HE
MANAGES TO GET THROUGH TO HIS
COUSIN, STILL TRAPPED ON THE
MOUNTAIN.
>> RIGHT NOW, THERE ARE CHILDREN
DYING HE IS TOLD.
OUR ARAB NEIGHBORS HAVE BETRAYED
US, THE WORLD HAS DESERTED US.
>> AND THOSE WHO HAVE ESCAPED TO
THIS BUILDING SITE WITH ALMOST
NOTHING ARE DESPERATELY WAITING
FOR NEWS.
AMID THE FRANTIC CHANTING OF
MOBILE PHONES.
>> SO THAT NEWS CAN GET THROUGH.
>> THESE PEOPLE HAVE NOT ONLY
FLED FOR THEIR LIVES, BUT MANY
OF THEM HAVE LEFT THEIR
RELATIVES MISSING OR DEAD BEHIND
THEM.
>> THEY HAVE ALMOST NOTHING TO
EAT AND UNLESS RELIEF
INTERNATIONAL RELIEF AGENCIES
GET HERE SOON THIS HUMANITARIAN
DISASTER COULD SIGNIFICANTLY
WORSEN.
A PICTURE THEN OF IRAQ'S YAZIDI
COMMUNITY, EXHAUSTED AFTER
WALKING FOR MILES, PERSECUTED TO
THE BRINK OF EXTERMINATION HERE,
EVEN AMID HUH, EVEN IF
HUMANITARIAN AND MILITARY HELP
TURN THE TIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
THIS, WE ARE JOINED ONCE AGAIN
TONIGHT FROM WASHINGTON BY
DOUGLAS OLLIVANT.
HE IS A SENIOR NATIONAL SECURITY
STUDIES FELLOW AT THE NEW
AMERICA FOUNDATION AND A PARTNER
AT MANTID INTERNATIONAL.
>> THE QUESTION WE HAVE REFERRED
TO THEM AS MILITANTS, AS
FIGHTERS, AS JIHADISTS BUT
CONSIDERING SOME OF THE
BRUTALITY THAT WE ARE HEARING
REPORTS OF, OF THE BURYING
PEOPLE ALIVE IN MASS GRAVES AND
INDISCRIMINATELY SHOOTING THEM,
IT SEEMS TO BE SOMEWHAT
DIFFERENT.
>> THEY ARE DIFFERENT, I MEAN,
THEY ARE ISLAMIST TERRORISTS,
THEY ARE ISLAMIST FIGHTERS BUT
THERE IS THIS CORE BRUTALITY TO
THEM, SOMETHING THAT REMINDS US
OF ALMOST KHMERROUGE
EXTERMINATION, THEIR TACTICS,
THEIR TERROR, THE DESTRUCTION OF
CULTURAL HERITAGE, THE RAPE, THE
SLAVE MARKETS WE HEAR, THE
BURYING ALIVE, WE HAVEN'T HEARD
ANY STORIES OF CRUCIFIXIONS IN
IRAQ BUT CERTAINLY WE HAVE SEEN
IT IN SYRIA BY THIS GROUP, THE
ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ AND SYRIA
OR ISIL OR THE ISLAMIC STATE,
THEY ARE SOMETHING VERY
DIFFERENT THAN WHAT WE HAVE SEEN
BEFORE.
>> AND THEY VERY HAVE BEEN CLEAR
ABOUT EXACTLY WHO THEY WANT TO
TARGET AND EVEN THE GEOGRAPHIC
AREA OF WHAT THEY WANT, I MEAN
IN IS THE CAL FAT, AN EMPIRE
THEY WANT TO RESURRECT.
>> RIGHT.
WELL, THEY DECLARED THE ISLAMIC
STATE A FEW WEEKS AGO SO NOW
EVIDENTLY THEY THINK THEY RULE
ALL MUSLIM AREAS FROM THE WEST
END OF EAST AFRICA AND SPAIN ALL
THE WAY TO INDONESIA.
>> BUT EVEN BEFORE THAT, THERE
WERE THE ISLAMIC STATE AND IRAQ
IN THE LEVANT, YOU LOOK THERE IT
IS VERY CLEAR THEY WANT JORDAN,
THEY WANT LEBANON, THEY WANT
ISRAEL, THE NORTHERN PART OF
SAUDI ARABIA, THE SOUTHERN PART
OF TURKEY, THEY ARE VERY CLEAR
ABOUT THEIR WAR AIMS.
>> AND EITHER THE FRENCH BORN
MINISTER HAD A QUOTE IN THE
PRESS, WE ARE NOT FIGHTING A
TERRORIST ORGANIZATION, WE ARE
FIGHTING A TERRORIST STATE, DOES
THAT CHANGE HOW THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY RESPONDS
TO THIS?
>> I THINK IT ABSOLUTELY HAS TO,
THAT IS ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
THIS IS NO LONGER A TERROR SAFE
HAVEN WITHIN A STATE, IT IS A DE
FACTO STATE THAT IS A TERRORIST
SAFE HAVEN.
AND, AGAIN, GIVEN THE BRUTALITY
OF THIS GROUP, AND THEIR CLEAR
LONG-TERM AIMS, WE DO NEED TO
TAKE THIS SERIOUSLY, RIGHT NOW
THEY ARE FOCUSED ON WHAT THEY
CALL THE NEAR ENEMY, THE MALIKI
AND ASSAD REGIMES BUT THIS TURN
TO THE KURDS TO THE NORTHEAST
DEMONSTRATE THAT'S NOT ALL THEY
ARE FOCUSED ON.
>> TODAY IT WAS KURDISTAN, IF I
WERE JORDAN OR LEBANON I WOULD
BE CONCERNED.
>> EVEN IF THE POLITICIANS ARE
ABLE TO AGREE IN BAGHDAD WHAT IS
TO KEEP THE FORCES ON THE GROUND
FROM TURNING AWAY AND RUNNING
LIKE THEY DID IN THE NORTH, IN
PREVIOUS OCCASIONS?
>> WELL, ONE, I THINK NOW THEY
HAVE SEEN WHAT ISIS IS AND THE
THREAT IT REPRESENTS TO THEIR
COUNTRIES SO HOPEFULLY THAT HAS
PUT MORE BACKBONE INTO THE
FORCES.
WE STILL DON'T ENTIRELY
UNDERSTAND WHAT HAPPENED IN
NORTH, SOME COMBINATION OF
INFILTRATION, DESERTIONS, GHOST
SOLDIERS, LOTS OF CORRUPTION,
POOR LEADERSHIP, LOTS OF THINGS
HAPPENED IN THE DISSOLVING OF
THE FORCES IN THE NORTH.
WHAT WE CAN HOPE FOR NOW IS FOR
MORE RELIABLE UNITS TO COME FROM
THE SOUTH FROM THE IRAQI ARMY,
FOR THE KURDISH TO COME FROM THE
NORTHEAST, PERHAPS NOT AS
RELIABLE AS WE WERE ONCE TOLD
THAT MAY BE FOR LACK OF
AMMUNITION AND WEAPONS AND FOR
THE SUNNIS THEMSELVES TO ASS A
FIFTH COLUMN ON BEHALF OF THE
IRAQI GOVERNMENT .. INSIDE THESE
AREAS THAT WILL BE THE
BATTLEGROUNDS AS SOME FIERCE
FIGHT WILLING HAVE TO TAKE PLACE
IN MOSUL, FALLUJAH AND OTHER
CITIES IF IRAQIS ARE GOING TO
RETAKE THIS LAND FROM THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
>> AND WHERE DO THE KURDS OR THE
PESHAWAR GET THAT AMMUNITION IF
THEY ARE TO LAUNCH A FIGHT?
>> THEY WILL HAVE TO CUT A DEAL
WITH BAGHDAD.
IT IS VERY, VERY DIFFICULT TO
ARM THE PESHAWAR DIRECTLY, FOR
THE UNITED STATES TO DO THAT,
BECAUSE OUR LAWS AS I UNDERSTAND
THEM DON'T ALLOW US TO GIVE
MILITARY EQUIPMENT TO A SUB
STATE GROUP IT HAS TO COME
THROUGH A STATE AND GO THROUGH
THEIR MINISTRY OF DEFENSE OR,
BAGHDAD WILL HAVE TO PLAY A
ROLE IN FACILITATING THE ARMING
OF THE KURDS.
FORTUNATELY IT LOOKS LIKE THEY
SEE THAT MAY WELL BE IN THEIR
INTEREST.
>> DOUGLAS OLLIVANT JOINING US
FROM WASHINGTON.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, HARRY.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: ISRAEL AND HAMAS
TODAY ACCEPTED AN EGYPTIAN PLAN
FOR ANOTHER 72-HOUR CEASE-FIRE,
AND ISRAEL SAID IT'S NEGOTIATORS
WOULD RETURN TO CAIRO TOMORROW
FOR NEGOTIATIONS ABOUT A LONGER-
TERM PEACE PLAN, IF THE TRUCE
HOLDS UNTIL THEN.
EARLIER TODAY, AT THE WEEKLY
CABINET MEETING, PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU SAID ISRAEL'S
MILITARY OPERATION IN GAZA WOULD
CONTINUE UNTIL IT MET IT'S GOAL,
WHICH HE SAID WAS, QUOTING NOW,
"THE RESTORATION OF QUIET FOR A
LONG PERIOD."
IN TURKEY TODAY, TENS OF
MILLIONS OF VOTERS TURNED OUT
FOR THE NATION'S FIRST DIRECT
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
AND THE MAN WHO HAS BEEN PRIME
MINISTER FOR 11 YEARS, TAYYIP
ERDOGAN WON WITH JUST MORE THAN
50%.
THAT MEANS THERE WILL BE NO
RUNOFF LATER THIS MONTH.
TURKEY IS A MEMBER OF NATO AND A
KEY ALLY OF THE UNITED STATES IN
THE REGION.
A TOP WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
OFFICIAL SAID TODAY HE THOUGHT
IT VERY UNLIKELY THAT THERE
WOULD BE A MAJOR EBOLA OUTBREAK
IN THE UNITED STATES DESPITE
PEOPLE FLYING INTO THIS COUNTRY
FROM LIBERIA, SIERRA LEONE AND
GUINEA, THREE WEST AFRICAN
NATIONS WHERE NEARLY ONE
THOUSAND PEOPLE HAVE DIED.
>> IT IS POSSIBLE THAT YOU MAY
HAVE SOME FEW CASES ASSOCIATED
WITH THAT, FEW INFECTIONS.
I THINK THAT IN THOSE COUNTRIES
WHICH REALLY HAVE GOOD HEALTH
SYSTEMS, GOOD HEALTH
PROFESSIONALS GOOD SURVEILLANCE
SYSTEMS IT'S VERY UNLIKELY THAT
YOU WOULD HAVE LARGE OUTBREAKS
IN THE WAY THAT WE ARE SEEING
THEM IN THESE COUNTRIES RIGHT
NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THIS COUNTRY:
OUTSIDE SAINT LOUIS LAST NIGHT,
DEMONSTRATORS GATHERED TO
PROTEST THE FATAL SHOOTING BY
POLICE OF AN UNARMED AFRICAN-
AMERICAN TEEN.
THE LOCAL CHAPTER OF THE
N.A.A.C.P. IS CALLING FOR A
FEDERAL INVESTIGATION.
THE OFFICER WHO FIRED THE FATAL
SHOT HAS BEEN PLACED ON PAID
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE.
POLICE SAID TODAY THAT THE
SHOOTING OCCURRED AFTER THE TEEN
ASSAULTED THE OFFICER AND
REACHED FOR THE OFFICER'S GUN.
POLICE IN MIAMI ARE TRYING TO
DETERMINE IF THE FATAL SHOOTING
OF A RABBI YESTERDAY WAS A HATE
CRIME.
JOSEPH RAKSIN WAS GUNNED DOWN EN
ROUTE TO A SYNAGOGUE.
EVEN THOUGH THE INCIDENT
OCCURRED IN AN AREA NEAR NORTH
MIAMI BEACH, WHERE SWASTIKAS
WERE PAINTED ON A SYNAGOGUE LAST
MONTH, AS OF NOW, POLICE SAY THE
EVIDENCE POINTS TO A BOTCHED
ROBBERY.
AND ONE OF AMERICA'S TOP RACE
CAR DRIVERS, TONY STEWART,
WITHDREW FROM AN EVENT TODAY
AFTER THE CAR HE WAS DRIVING
DURING A RACE LAST NIGHT IN
UPSTATE NEW YORK HIT AND KILLED
ANOTHER DRIVER.
THE INCIDENT OCCURRED LESS THAN
A MINUTE AFTER STEWART'S CAR
APPARENTLY BUMPED THE CAR DRIVEN
BY KEVIN WARD JUNIOR, CAUSING
WARD TO SPIN OUT AND CRASH INTO
A WALL.
WARD THEN LEFT HIS CAR,
EVIDENTLY TO CONFRONT STEWART AS
HE CAME BACK AROUND.
THAT'S WHEN STEWART'S CAR HIT
HIM.
AUTHORITIES ARE INVESTIGATING
THE INCIDENT.
A STORY PUBLISHED EARLIER THIS
WEEK IN THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
GOT OUR ATTENTION.
IT DESCRIBED A GALLUP POLL
MEASURING HOW STUDENT LOAN DEBTS
UNDERMINE THE HAPPINESS AND
WELL-BEING OF BORROWERS YEARS
AFTER THEY GRADUATE COLLEGE.
YESTERDAY, I INTERVIEWED THE
AUTHOR OF THE PIECE, DOUGLAS
BELKIN, WHO JOINED US FROM
CHICAGO.
I BEGAN BY ASKING HIM HOW GALLUP
DEFINED WELL-BEING.
>> GALLUP CAME UP WITH THIS
WELL-BEING INDEX 30 YEARS AGO
AND THEY HAVE A SERIES OF
QUESTIONS THAT LOOKS LIKE SENSE
OF PURPOSE IN LIFE, IF YOU
CONNECTED TO YOUR JOB, HOW WELL
YOU FEEL PHYSICALLY IF YOU HAVE
A LOT OF ENERGY, IF YOU ARE
CONNECTED TO YOUR COMMUNITY IF
YOU ARE CONNECTED, IF YOU HAVE
GOOD SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS, SORT
OF A LOT OF SOFTBALL QUESTIONS
LIKE THAT AND ASKED THEM AND
THEY CORRELATE IT WITH HOW MUCH
DEBT YOU HAVE, AND THEY DID
THIS FOR THE 30,000 COLLEGE
GRADUATES, THESE QUESTIONS IN
MARCH AND IT TURNS OUT THAT
EVEN 25 YEARS AFTER YOU HAVE
GRADUATED THE MORE DEBT YOU
CARRIED WHEN YOU GRADUATED, THE
MORE POORLY YOU SCORED ON THOSE
QUESTIONS LATER ON.
>> SO THEY SAID THEY FELT LESS
PHYSICALLY FIT, LESS CONNECTED
TO THEIR JOB, THEIR FAMILY?
HOW BAD IS IT?
>> IT IS WORSE THAN YOU THINK.
THE INTERESTING PART ABOUT THIS,
TO ME, WAS THAT IT CARRIES ON SO
MUCH LONGER.
THE REAL QUESTION IS WHY, I
THINK, BUT YOU ARE TALKING ABOUT
DIFFERENCE OF 15 POINTS IN TERMS
OF THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE, THE
PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE WHO FEEL
PHYSICALLY FIT, FOR INSTANCE, OR
HAVE A PURPOSE IN THEIR JOB.
SO FOLKS WHO HAVE A STRONG
ANSWER FOR WHAT EXACTLY IS
HAPPENING, EXCEPT IF YOU GET OUT
OF SCHOOL AND OWE A LOT OF MONEY
YOUR OPTIONS ARE LIMITED, YOU
OWE THAT, FIVE OR 6,000 BUCKS
AND YOU WANT TO TAKE A JOB,
MAYBE IN THE HELPING SERVICES OR
HELPING PEOPLE, THAT YOU ARE
DRAWN TOWARD A JOB THAT PAYS
BETTER, YOU LIKE LESS, THESE
SORT OF THINGS INFLUENCE
DECISIONS, YOU KNOW, FOR YEARS.
>> AND IS THERE A TIPPING POINT
NUMBER OF STUDENT DEBT THAT
MAKES PEOPLE WORSE IN IS IT
$25,000?
$50,000?
>> AROUND $25,000 THE NUMBERS
START TO LOOK BLEAKER.
THE AVERAGE DEBT RIGHT NOW FOR A
GRADUATE OF COLLEGE IS 33,000, A
LITTLE OVER $33,000.
AND THAT IS FOR THE 70 ODD
PERCENT OF KIDS WHO GRADUATE
WITH DEBT.
THIS SURVEY LOOKED AT COLLEGE
GRADUATES FOR DECADES, IT PEOPLE
WHO GRADUATED BEFORE 1990 TOOK
OUT SO LITTLE DEBT, THIS SURVEY
LOOKED JUST AT 1990 FORWARD,
RIGHT NOW, THE NUMBERS WERE
WORSE AT $50,000 PLUS, 33-6 OR
33-4, WHERE KIDS ARE GRADUATING
ON AVERAGE NOW HAS ALMOST
DOUBLED IN TEN YEARS AND
PROBABLY GOING TO HIT 50,000
EVENTUALLY.
>> LET'S TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
CORRELATION VERSUS CAUSATION,
THESE ARE SUBJECTIVE ANSWERS
THESE PEOPLE ARE GIVING, WHAT
ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY THERE ARE
PEOPLE WHO DIDN'T TAKE OUT DEBT
WERE MAYBE WEALTHIER AND HAPPIER
TO START WITH.
>> THAT IS CERTAINLY POSSIBLE,
THIS SURVEY DOESN'T AND CAN'T
LOOK AT THAT.
IT ISN'T KNOWN IF THIS IS
CAUSAL OR CORRELATIONAL.
IF YOU ARE JUST MORE ENGAGED
IN LIFE AND MORE UPBEAT YOU DO
BETTER, IT IS NOT CLEAR IF THAT
IS BECAUSE -- IT IS NOT CLEAR
HOW THAT STANDS LATER ON IN
LIFE.
>> AND THEN WHAT ABOUT THE IDEA
OF THE THINGS THAT THE DEBT
MIGHT COMPROMISE IN YOUR LIFE,
IF YOU HAVE A HUGE STUDENT DEBT,
MAYBE YOU ARE PUTTING OFF BUYING
A HOUSE OR ANOTHER MAJOR
PURCHASE AND THAT GIVE YOU SOME
TENSION, TEN, 15 YEARS DOWN THE
LINE.
>> YES IF YOU HAVE BIG DEBT AND
CAN'T SAVE ENOUGH FOR A HOUSE.
RIGHT NOW KIDS ARE PUTTING
OFF BUYING HOUSES MUCH LONGER
THAN THEY WERE, A DECADE OR TWO
AGO, THEY ARE PUTTING OFF
MARRIAGE AND CHILDREN AS WELL,
FURTHERMORE, YOU MAY PAY OFF THE
DEBT AND MOVE INTO A HOUSE BUT
YOU DIDN'T START SAVING ON
RETIREMENT BECAUSE YOU WERE
FOCUSED ON PAYING OFF YOUR DEBT
SO THAT ADDS STRESS TO YOUR LIFE
IN 40s AND 50S.
>> IS, IS THERE A TAKE AWAY
LESSON?
LET'S SAY I AM A PARENT OF A
CHILD ABOUT TO GO INTO COLLEGE
OR ABOUT TO ENTER COLLEGE
MYSELF, IS THERE SOME WAY I
SHOULD STRUCTURE MY DEBT
THINKING FORWARD, THIS MAY MAKE
ME MORE OR LESS HAPPY?
>> I THINK IT IS AN ANTECEDENT
TO STRUCTURING YOUR DEBT AND
YOUR COLLEGE EXPERIENCE, 20
YEARS AGO, THE CONVENTIONAL
WISDOM WAS YOU TAKE OUT AS MUCH
DEBT AS YOU NEED OR YOU GO TO
THE BEST SCHOOL YOU GOT INTO,
AND THAT SORT OF IS WHERE THE
THINKING STOPPED.
NOW, IT IS MORE ABOUT HOW YOU GO
TO COLLEGE, SO WHAT THE SURVEY
HAS FOUND IS THAT IF YOU ARE
CONNECTED TO A PROFESSOR, IF YOU
HAVE A MENTOR AT SCHOOL, IF YOU
HAVE SORT OF EXPERIENTIAL
LEARNING IN SCHOOL, YOU ARE
MUCH MORE ENGAGED IN WORK AS YOU
GO.
SO HOW YOU GO TO SCHOOL, WHAT
YOU DO WHILE YOU ARE THERE IS AS
IMPORTANT OR MORE IMPORTANT THAN
WHERE YOU GO TO SCHOOL.
THERE IS NO RELATIONSHIP TO
BEING MUCH MORE HAPPY IN LIFE
OR ENGAGED IN WORK ACCORDING TO
THE PRESTIGE OF THE SCHOOL THAT
YOU WENT TO.
>> ALL RIGHT.
DOUG BELKIN OF THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO THE
ARTS, AND AN EXHIBIT IN BOSTON
FEATURING THE WORKS OF JAMIE
WYETH, THE GRANDSON OF ARTIST
AND ILLUSTRATOR N.C. WYETH AND
THE SON OF THE PAINTER ANDREW
WYETH.
RECENTLY, JARED BOWEN OF WGBH
SAT DOWN WITH HIM TO TALK ABOUT
SOME OF THE WORKS IN THE EXHIBIT
AND TO LOOK BACK AT HIS NOW 60-
YEAR CAREER.
>> I HAVE NO IDEA WHAT INSPIRES
ME, ALL THE THINGS THAT I PAINT
ARE THING THAT I KNOW VERY WELL.
>> Reporter: AND JAMIE WYETH
WILL TELL YOU: IT'S ALL HE'S
EVER KNOWN.
60 YEARS OF THE PROLIFIC
PAINTER'S WORK ARE NOW ON VIEW
AT THE MUSEUM OF FINE ARTS IN
HIS FIRST MAJOR RETROSPECTIVE.
IT TAKES US FROM WYETH'S BOYHOOD
PROMISE TO LATE-IN-LIFE
REFLECTIONS.
SEEING ALL YOUR WORK FROM VERY
EARLY ON, TO THE MOST RECENT
PIECES, WHAT IS IT LIKE TO SEE
EVERYTHING IN ONE PLACE?
>> THE EMOTION IS SHEER TERROR
ON MY PART, I MEAN I REALLY AM
NOT BEING CUTE ABOUT IT, I TRY
TO TELL A VARIETY OF FRIENDS OF
MINE, IT'S AS IF YOU'RE IN A
ROOM AND EVERYBODY'S READING
YOUR NEW NOVEL OR YOUR NEW POEM,
ALL THE INADEQUACIES STARING AT
IT, I CRINGE AND SAY '¡WHAT WAS
I
THINKING?
WHY DID I GET OBSESSED WITH
THAT?"
SO ITS NOT A PLEASANT
EXPERIENCE, I'M OBVIOUSLY
INCREDIBLY HONORED.
>> Reporter: IN TRUTH, HE'S
ALWAYS BEEN IN THE SPOTLIGHT AS
THE THIRD GENERATION OF THE
FAMED WYETH FAMILY, THE SON OF
ANDREW, THE GRANDSON OF N.C.
WERE YOU CONSCIOUS OF WHO CAME
BEFORE YOU IN TERMS OF YOUR
FATHER AND GRANDFATHER AND WHAT
THEY DEPICTED?
>> WELL, I LOVE THEIR WORK.
I MEAN I, AS A VERY YOUNG CHILD
OF COURSE MY GRANDFATHER, HE
DIED BEFORE I WAS BORN, BUT HERE
WAS THIS PHYSICALLY HUGE STUDIO
UP THE HILL FROM OUR HOUSE, FULL
OF COSTUMES AND CUTLASSES AND
FLINT LIKE RIFLES ALL FROM HIS
PROPS FROM HIS ILLUSTRATIONS, SO
IT WAS MAGICAL TO ME.
AND I ALWAYS SAY, THEN I WOULD
GO BACK TO OUR HOUSE AND THERE
WOULD BE MY FATHER PAINTING A
DEAD CROW OR SOMETHING, AND THAT
WAS KIND OF BORING.
>> Reporter: WYETH'S EARLIEST
PIECES, SAVED AND ANNOTATED BY
HIS MOTHER, REVEAL A CHILD'S
FASCINATION WITH ADVENTURE.
MORE SIGNIFICANTLY THOUGH, THEY
SHOW HIS EARLY MASTERY OF THE
LINE.
HE WAS AN ARTIST TO THE CANVAS
BORN.
IS IT SOMETHING YOU COULD EVER
CONCEIVE OF NOT BEING CENTRAL TO
YOUR LIFE?
>> WELL ACTUALLY I HAVE A
BROTHER NIKKI WHO, AN OLDER
BROTHER, WHO ATE THE SAME BACON
AND EGGS AND HE HAD NO INTEREST
IN PAINTING.
SO IT WASN'T FORCED UPON US, BUT
THE TOOLS WERE THERE.
WE LIVED IN MY FATHER'S STUDIO
SO THERE WERE THE BRUSHES AND
THE PENCILS AND THE PAINTS, SO
IT WAS VERY NATURAL FOR ME TO
WANT TO PAINT.
IT WAS NEVER QUESTIONED.
>> Reporter: BY AGE 17, IN HIS
PORTRAIT OF SHORTY, WYETH'S
SKILL WAS ALREADY LONG CEMENTED
AND CONSUMING.
>> I WOULD JUST GET UP IN THE
MORNING, JUST WANTED TO PAINT.
I'M A VERY BORING PERSON, AND
THEN ALL I DO IS WANT TO PAINT
AND TO RECORD WHAT I FEEL MOVES
ME OR WHAT INTERESTS ME, AND
THAT COULD BE IN THE FORM OF A
PIG OR IN THE FORM OF PRESIDENT
KENNEDY.
>> Reporter: HIS PORTRAIT OF
JOHN F. KENNEDY, RECENTLY
ACQUIRED BY THE MFA, WAS PAINTED
AFTER THE PRESIDENT'S DEATH AT
THE REQUEST OF HIS GRIEVING
FAMILY.
>> I WAS TAKEN BY THE KENNEDYS
AS MUCH AS EVERYONE WAS AT THAT
TIME.
AND THEN I REALIZED I STARTED
DOING THIS SORT OF GLORIFIED
PORTRAIT OF PRESIDENT KENNEDY
AND I FELT THE NEED TO HAVE LIFE
SO I DID A LOT OF DRAWINGS THE
TWO BROTHERS, BOB AND TED.
HIS WIDOW JACKIE SHOWED ME ALL
HER FILMS.
I ALWAYS SAY IT ADDED UP TO
MAYBE I HAD SAT WITH HIM FOR TEN
MINUTES, TO AT LEAST TO CREATE A
MEMORY OF A LIVING PERSON.
I DIDN'T WANT TO JUST WORK FROM
PHOTOGRAPHS, AND ACTUALLY
THERE'S A PORTRAIT OF TED UNDER
THE ACTUAL PAINTING
>> Reporter: REALLY?
IN WHAT WAY?
>> I LITERALLY DID HIM AND THEN
CHANGED IT INTO HIS BROTHER,
JUST TO HAVE--
I WAS SO DESPERATE, I DIDN'T
WANT IT TO LOOK LIKE
PREPOSTEROUS PORTRAIT.
>> Reporter: DANCER RUDOLF
NUREYEV THOUGH WAS SOMEONE WYETH
KNEW INCREDIBLY WELL, HAVING
STUDIED THE RUSSIAN BALLET STAR
INTENSELY FOR A YEAR AND A HALF.
>> ON STAGE HE WAS EXTRAORDINARY
OF COURSE, BUT OFF STAGE HE WAS
AS FASCINATING.
HE WOULD COME AND STAY AT OUR
HOUSE, AND IT WAS LIKE HAVING A
PANTHER IN THE HOUSE.
HE HAD THIS AMAZING PRESENCE,
AND THIS SORT OF REMARKABLE
AND THIS SORT OF REMARKABLE LOOK
AND THAT JUST DREW ME.
HE WAS BEYOND DANCE, HE WAS JUST
THIS AMAZING FIGURE.
>> Reporter: WYETH MET NUREYEV
DURING HIS DAYS AT ANDY WARHOL'S
FACTORY, THAT 1970S NEW YORK
HOTBED OF THE AVANT-GARDE,
EXPLORATION AND SEXUALITY.
IT WAS A MOST UNLIKELY COMBO.
>> SOMETIMES OPPOSITES ATTRACT,
AND I ALWAYS-- I WAS INTRIGUED
WITH HIS WORK, AND THE RESONANCE
HE HAS TODAY I THINK IS
REMARKABLE WITH YOUNG PEOPLE
STILL.
I MEAN THE QUALITY I MOST LOVED
IN WARHOL IT WAS HIS SENSE OF
WONDER, HE WAS ABSOLUTELY, I
MEAN HE WAS, "OH, MY GOD, ISN'T
THAT WONDERFUL?"
IT WASN'T THAT HE WAS COOL AND
KIND OF CALCULATED AT ALL.
HE WAS VERY CHILD-LIKE."
>> Reporter: PERSONALITIES
ASIDE, MUCH OF WYETH'S WORK HAS
BEEN ABOUT PAINTING PLACE--
SPECIFICALLY, WHERE HE GREW UP,
THE RUGGED COAST OF MAINE AND
THE BUCOLIC BRANDYWINE RIVER
VALLEY STRETCHING BETWEEN
PENNSYLVANIA AND DELAWARE.
>> I'M NOT INTERESTED IN
TRAVELLING AND I NEVER TRAVEL,
AND PAINTING THE HIMALAYAS, I
DON'T CARE ABOUT SCENES, I DON'T
CARE ABOUT INTERESTING LOOKING
TREES.
WHAT I DO CARE ABOUT ARE TREES
THAT I KNOW THAT I'VE GROWN UP
WITH AND TOUCHED.
I JUST THINK IT MAKES THE WORK
MORE MEANINGFUL.
THE MORE YOU'RE FAMILIAR WITH
SOMETHING, AND COMFORTABLE, AND
HAVE A LOVE FOR IT, OR A HATE
FOR IT EVEN, THE BETTER THE
RESULT.
>> Reporter: FOR JAMIE WYETH,
HIS LIFE'S WORK IS HIS LIFE
STORY.
>> SOME NEWS BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU
TONIGHT, UKRAINIAN AUTHORITIES
CLAIM TODAY PRO-RUSSIAN SEPARATE
TESTS ARE DESERTING IN MASS AS
GOVERNMENT FORCES ATTACK THE
REBEL'S LAST MAJOR STRONGHOLD.
AT LEAST 1,300 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
IN THE FIGHTING THERE SINCE
APRIL.
AND UPSTATE NEW YORK SAID THERE
IS NO REASON TO BELIEVE NASCAR
CHAMPION TONY STEWART HAD
CRIMINAL INTENT WHEN HE HIT AND
KILLED ANOTHER DRIVER DURING A
RACE LAST NIGHT.
JOINING US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW FOR THE LATEST ON IRAQ
AND THE FIGHT AGAINST ISLAMIC
REBELS THERE.
I AM HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR JOINING US AND HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.